PMM-15088 AI guidelines (#5409)
percona/pmm: AGENTS.md

# PMM Development Guide for AI Agents

## How AI agents load this document

**`AGENTS.md` is the tool-neutral source of truth for this repo — any AI agent should read this file (and the linked component guides) directly, whichever assistant it is.** It follows the cross-tool `AGENTS.md` convention, so most agents pick it up automatically.

Some tools also use a thin pointer file that simply routes them here — these are examples, not an exclusive list:

| Tool | Pointer file (→ reads `AGENTS.md`) |
|------|------|
| Cursor | `.cursor/rules/pmm-agents-entrypoint.mdc` (`alwaysApply: true`) |
| Claude Code | [CLAUDE.md](CLAUDE.md) |
| GitHub Copilot | [.github/copilot-instructions.md](.github/copilot-instructions.md) |

> Any other agent can read `AGENTS.md` directly. Tool-specific local files (e.g. `.claude/`, `.cursor/`) stay gitignored for personal experimentation.

Reviewer: Inconsistent with the .gitignore in the PR, which commits .cursor/rules/.

## How This Documentation Is Organized

This guide provides the product-wide overview, architecture, domain model, conventions, and cross-links to component-specific guides.

| Audience | Location |
|----------|----------|
| Human contributors | [`CONTRIBUTING.md`](CONTRIBUTING.md), [`dev/docs/process/`](dev/docs/process/) |
| AI agents | This file + component `AGENTS.md` guides |

> This file **summarizes and links** process docs; it does not replace them. Pull out operational rules here only when agents routinely get them wrong.

Reviewer: > Pull out operational rules here only when agents routinely get them wrong.

This is the right principle, but this PR adds lots of lines to this file that contradict that. AGENTS.md will be fully injected into every session's context, so any conditional procedures in it will be read every time even if unnecessarily. 
For example, the steps about "Running PMM locally", "Registering databases", and "the user-visible verification protocol" only matter once an agent already knows it's doing runtime verification (which is already routed in the decision trees and DoD checklist). I'd suggest moving those into a separate file and just leaving the pointers.

This "lazy loading" by instruction leads to a weaker guarantee, of course, so it should be tested, but I've personally seen good results with that approach as long as the decision-tree and checklist stay eager.

2. Run `make gen`.
3. Implement handler/service logic in `managed/services/<domain>/`.
4. Add or extend tests in `api-tests/<domain>/`.
5. If UI-facing: add API module in `ui/apps/pmm/src/api/` and TanStack Query hooks in `ui/apps/pmm/src/hooks/api/`.
6. If public API docs change: update [`docs/api/`](docs/api/) (PR template checkbox).

### Adding a DB table or migration

1. Add a versioned migration in `managed/models/database.go`.
2. Add or update the reform model; run `//go:generate` or `make gen`.
3. Add CRUD helpers in `*_helpers.go` or `*_crud.go` as surrounding code does.
4. Prefer `go-sqlmock` for unit tests; use `testdb.Open` when SQL/migration behavior must be verified.

### Adding a UI page or settings section

1. Read [`ui/AGENTS.md`](ui/AGENTS.md).
2. Add route in `ui/apps/pmm/src/router.tsx` if needed.
3. API functions in `ui/apps/pmm/src/api/`; TanStack Query hooks in `ui/apps/pmm/src/hooks/api/`.
4. Co-locate Vitest tests (`*.test.ts` / `*.test.tsx`).
5. Run `cd ui && make lint && make test` before opening a PR.
6. JSON on the wire is **snake_case** (`axios-case-converter`); TypeScript uses **camelCase**.

---

## Git and pull request checklist

> Full rules: [`docs/process/GIT_AND_GITHUB.md`](docs/process/GIT_AND_GITHUB.md). For commits and PR titles, use **[Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/)** (`type(scope): summary`) — not the `PMM-XXXX` title style from the process doc. When opening PRs to the upstream Percona repo, confirm with reviewers if they expect conventional titles or `PMM-XXXX` titles from the process doc.

Reviewer 2: We don't follow `https://www.conventionalcommits.org`, we follow a PMM-specific convention.

| Item | Rule |
|------|------|
| Branch name | `PMM-1234-short-description` (lowercase, dashes) |
| Commit title | `type(scope): short imperative summary` — e.g. `feat(ui): add OTEL settings scroll`, `fix(managed): normalize log parser YAML` |
| PR title | Same format as commit title (squash merge uses the PR title) |
| Types | `feat` (feature), `fix` (bug), `chore` (deps, lint, tooling), `refactor`, `test`, `docs` |
| Scope | Optional but preferred: `ui`, `managed`, `api`, `agent`, `adre`, `investigations`, `dashboards`, … |

> | Ticket | Put `PMM-XXXX` in the branch name and/or PR body — not required in the title |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Ticket | Put `PMM-XXXX` in the branch name and/or PR body, required in the title as well |
```

| Review fixes | New commit per round — do not amend and force-push |
| Merge | Squash and merge on GitHub |
| PR body | What/why, Feature Build link for features/fixes/improvements, link related PRs |
| API changes | Check API docs updated if endpoints changed |
| Before review | Tests and linters pass for every area touched (see [Linting decision tree](#linting-decision-tree); Go/API: `make prepare-pr`; UI: `cd ui && make lint`) |

---

## Feature areas

Some areas span multiple directories. When working on them, read **both** the component guide and the paths below. These paths exist on branches that land the work (e.g. ADRE, OTEL); if a directory is missing on your branch, skip it.

| Area | Backend | UI | Notes |
|------|---------|-----|-------|

> | **ADRE / AI Assistant** | `managed/services/adre/` | `ui/apps/pmm/src/pages/adre/`, `components/adre/` | HolmesGPT integration, chat, usage |

Reviewer 2: What is ADRE? Where does it come from?

Author: right I had it in my branch but not committed yet. will remove.

| **Investigations** | `managed/services/investigations/` | `ui/apps/pmm/src/pages/investigations/` | AI investigation workflows |

> | **OTEL** | `managed/otel/`, `dev/otel/` | Settings → OTEL tab | Log collectors, parser presets |

Reviewer 2: We don't have anything called OTEL in our repo yet.

Author: right I had it in my branch but not committed yet. will remove.

> | **User docs** | — | — | [`documentation/`](documentation/) (MkDocs), not [`docs/process/`](docs/process/) |

Reviewer 2: No, the user-facing documentation is located in "documentation/docs".

**The iterate loop** (no image rebuild, container stays up):

1. `make env-up` — start the server once.
2. Change code.
3. `make env TARGET=run-managed-ci` — rebuild + hot-swap the affected binary.
4. `make env TARGET=api-test` (or `test-common`) — run the smallest test set.
5. On failure: read the error, fix, and repeat from step 3. **Do not re-run `env-up` each iteration.**

Use the `-ci` variants: `run-managed` (without `-ci`) tails the log and blocks; `run-managed-ci` returns.

**Server logs** live in `/srv/logs/` on `pmm-server` (each `run-*-ci` truncates its log first, so each iteration starts clean):

```bash
docker exec pmm-server tail -n 200 /srv/logs/pmm-managed.log   # also: pmm-agent.log, qan-api2.log, vmproxy.log
```

**Accessing it:** open **https://localhost** (accept the self-signed cert) and log in with PMM's default **`admin`/`admin`**. Hit the REST API directly — paths are in `api/swagger/swagger.json` (e.g. `curl -k -u admin:admin https://localhost/v1/...`). Handy ports: main UI HMR `5173` (`make run-ui`), QAN plugin (`make run-qan-ui`), PostgreSQL `5432`, VictoriaMetrics `9090`, ClickHouse `9000`/`8123`, Delve `2345`, Mailhog UI `8025`.

> **Machine-specific paths and credentials** (pmm-qa checkout location, screenshot output dir, tokens) belong in an **`AGENTS.local.md`** — at the repo root for per-checkout settings (gitignored), and/or **`~/AGENTS.local.md`** in your home directory for settings shared across all your PMM checkouts (outside the repo, so no gitignore needed). Read whichever exist at session start. Keep every committed `AGENTS.md` free of machine paths and secrets.

Reviewer: This is a critical issue. You should not put tokens/credentials in a file whose sole purpose is to be fed into model context at session start - this means the secrets will be sent on every request to whichever AI provider they have, and land in transcripts and logs. It even contradicts the Security section of this PR ("Never log, hardcode, or commit secrets").
The machine-specific paths yes can be in the local file, but tokens and sensitive vars should be kept in env vars or a secret store, and be referenced by name.

Also worth mentioning here: I'm not sure any widely-used harness natively supports `AGENTS.local.md` without configuration. I know Codex supports `AGENTS.override.md`, but I think this is treated as a replacement rather than a stack, and some harnesses support additional instructions files to be set in configuration (eg [`context.fileName` for Gemini](https://geminicli.com/docs/cli/gemini-md/#customize-the-context-file-name), [`instructions` for OpenCode](https://dev.opencode.ai/docs/rules/#custom-instructions))
